Dynamic Permissions (#111)
MetaMask/SIPs: SIPS/sip-14.md

---
sip: 14
title: Dynamic Permissions
status: Draft
discussions-to: https://github.com/MetaMask/SIPs/discussions/114
author: Frederik Bolding (@frederikbolding)
created: 2023-10-19
---

## Abstract

> This SIP proposes changes to the Snap manifest and new RPC methods that would allow Snap developers to request additional permissions dynamically at runtime. This proposal outlines some of the details around this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SIP proposes changes to the Snap manifest and new RPC methods that allows Snap developers to request additional permissions dynamically at runtime. This proposal outlines some of the details around this feature.
```

## Motivation

Snaps currently have to request all permissions that they plan to use at install-time. This becomes a problem when a Snap wants to use many permissions as the installation experience suffers and the user has to either accept all permissions requested or deny the installation. This proposal provides an improvement to the experience by letting Snaps request permissions at run-time as long as those permissions are statically defined in the manifest at build-time.

## Specification

> Formal specifications are written in Typescript. Usage of `CAIP-N` specifications, where `N` is a number, are references to [Chain Agnostic Improvement Proposals](https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs).

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" written in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### Snap Manifest

This SIP adds a new field to the Snap manifest called `dynamicPermissions`.

> This field can be used in tandem with the existing `initialPermissions`, but keep in mind that permissions in this field are not granted by installation: They MUST be requested when needed. The field follows the same format as `initialPermissions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This field can be used in tandem with the existing `initialPermissions`, but permissions in this field are not granted by installation: They MUST be requested when needed. The field follows the same format as `initialPermissions`.
```

The new field can be specified as follows in a `snap.manifest.json` file:

```json
{
  "initialPermissions": {
    "endowment:transaction-insight": {}
  },
  "dynamicPermissions": {
    "snap_dialog": {},
    "snap_getBip44Entropy": [
      {
        "coinType": 1
      },
      {
        "coinType": 3
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> ### Permission caveats and merging

Reviewer: Implementation detail?
```suggestion
### Permission caveats
```

> In this initial version, duplicated permissions in `initialPermissions` and `dynamicPermissions` MUST NOT be allowed. A permission MUST only be able to exist in one of the manifest fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Duplicated permissions in `initialPermissions` and `dynamicPermissions` MUST NOT be allowed. A permission MUST only be able to exist in one of the manifest fields.
```

Furthermore, permissions specified in `dynamicPermissions` MUST contain the caveats that will be requested at runtime and the permission request MUST fully match the caveats specified in the manifest.

This MAY change in a future SIP.

### RPC Methods

This SIP proposes the following RPC methods to manage the dynamic permissions:

#### snap_requestPermissions

> This RPC method SHOULD function as a subset of the existing `wallet_requestPermissions` RPC method and take the same parameters and have the same return value.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the spec of `wallet_requestPermissions`.

> This RPC method MUST prompt the user to get consent for any requested permissions and MUST validate that the requested permissions are specified in the manifest before continuing its execution (including caveats matching).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RPC method MUST prompt the user to get consent for any requested permissions and MUST validate that the requested permissions are specified in the manifest before continuing its execution (including matching caveats).

```

#### snap_getPermissions

> This RPC method SHOULD be an alias for `wallet_getPermissions`, MAY be used by the snap for verifying whether it already has the permissions needed for operating. The return value and parameters SHOULD match the existing specification.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the spec of `wallet_getPermissions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RPC method SHOULD be an alias for `wallet_getPermissions`, and MAY be used by the Snap for verifying whether it already has the permissions needed for operating. The return value and parameters SHOULD match the existing specification.
```

#### snap_revokePermissions

> This RPC method SHOULD take a similar input to `wallet_requestPermissions`, an object keyed with permission names, where the values may contain caveats if applicable.

Reviewer: Maybe link to the spec of `wallet_requestPermissions`.

For example:

```json
{
  "method": "snap_revokePermissions",
  "params": {
    "snap_getBip32Entropy": {
      "caveats": [
        {
          "type": "permittedDerivationPaths",
          "value": [
            { "path": ["m", "44'", "60'"], "curve": "secp256k1" },
            { "path": ["m", "0'", "0'"], "curve": "ed25519" }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> The caveat information passed SHOULD be ignored in the initial implementation of this. Instead of processing the caveats, the implementation SHOULD revoke the entire permission key. We will revisit this at a later time to make it more granular.

Reviewer: Does it make sense to specify the caveats if it's ignored? Or is it for future compatibility?

Author: The idea was that it would be future proof this way. We can make it more granular as we see fit

Reviewer: I would probably just remove the caveat part. It just makes it more complicated for Snaps developers to use this method, doesn't it? In the future when we revisit this, Snaps developers can just change it to only revoke certain caveats, and we revoke everything if the object is empty or something.

> This RPC method SHOULD return `null` if the permissions are revoked successfully and otherwise throw.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RPC method SHOULD return `null` if the permissions are revoked successfully, or return an error otherwise.
```

> This RPC method MUST validate that the permissions requested to be revoked does not contain or overlap with the `initialPermissions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RPC method MUST validate that the permissions to be revoked do not contain any permissions specified in `initialPermissions`. Only `dynamicPermissions` can be revoked.
```

---
sip: 14
title: Dynamic Permissions
status: Draft
discussions-to: 
author: Frederik Bolding (@frederikbolding)
created: 2023-10-19
---

## Abstract

> This SIP proposes changes to the snap manifest and new RPC methods that would allow snap developers to request additional permissions dynamically at runtime. This proposal outlines some of the details around this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SIP proposes changes to the Snap manifest and new RPC methods that would allow Snap developers to request additional permissions dynamically at runtime. This proposal outlines some of the details around this feature.
```

## Motivation

> Snaps currently have to request all permissions that they plan to use at install-time. This becomes a problem when a snap wants to use many permissions as the installation experience suffers and the user has to either accept all permissions requested or deny the installation. This proposal provides an improvement to the experience by letting snaps request permissions at run-time as long as those permissions are statically defined in the manifest at build-time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Snaps currently have to request all permissions that they plan to use at install-time. This becomes a problem when a Snap wants to use many permissions as the installation experience suffers and the user has to either accept all permissions requested or deny the installation. This proposal provides an improvement to the experience by letting Snaps request permissions at run-time as long as those permissions are statically defined in the manifest at build-time.
```

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" written in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### Snap Manifest

This SIP adds a new field to the snap manifest called `dynamicPermissions`.
This field can be used in tandem with the existing `initialPermissions`, but keep in mind that permissions in this field are not granted by installation, they MUST be requested when needed.

The new field can be specified as follows in a `snap.manifest.json` file:

```json
{
  "initialPermissions": {
    "endowment:transaction-insight": {}
  },
  "dynamicPermissions": {
    "snap_dialog": {},
    "snap_getBip44Entropy": [
      {
        "coinType": 1
      },
      {
        "coinType": 3
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Permission caveats and merging

In this initial version, duplicated permissions in `initialPermissions` and `dynamicPermissions` MUST NOT be allowed. A permission MUST only be able to exist in one of the manifest fields.

> Furthermore, permissions specified in `dynamicPermissions` MUST contain the caveats that will be requested at runtime and the permission request MUST fully match the caveats specified in the manifest.

Author: Isn't that always implied?

### RPC Methods

This SIP also proposes new RPC methods to manage these new permissions:

#### snap_requestPermissions
This RPC method SHOULD function as a subset of the existing `wallet_requestPermissions` RPC method and take the same parameters and have the same return value. This function MAY be a middleware that rewrites requests to `wallet_requestPermissions` if needed. 

This RPC method MUST prompt the user to get consent for any requested permissions and MUST validate that the requested permissions are specified in the manifest before continuing its execution (including caveats matching).

#### snap_getPermissions
This RPC method SHOULD be an alias for `wallet_getPermissions`, MAY be used by the snap for verifying whether it already has the permissions needed for operating. The return value and parameters SHOULD match the existing specification.

> #### snap_revokePermissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### snap_revokePermissions

```

The RPC method parameters and return value are TBD.

> Note: This RPC method does not currently have a `wallet_` counterpart. Coordinate with dapp API team as they may be shipping one.

Reviewer: We should remove this line before merging.

Author: Yes, just adding until we talk to them

---
sip: 14
title: Dynamic Permissions
status: Draft
discussions-to: 
author: Frederik Bolding (@frederikbolding)
created: 2023-10-19
---

## Abstract

This SIP proposes changes to the Snap manifest and new RPC methods that would allow Snap developers to request additional permissions dynamically at runtime. This proposal outlines some of the details around this feature.

## Motivation

> Snaps currently have to request all permissions that they plan to use at install-time. This becomes a problem when a Snap wants to use many permissions as the installation experience suffers and the user has to either accept all permissions requested or deny the installation. This proposal provides an improvement to the experience by letting Snaps request permissions at run-time as long as those permissions are statically defined in the manifest at build-time.

Author: Yes, that is true. But `eth_accounts` is kind of an edge-case right now. We should probably require it being put into `dynamicPermissions`

> Snaps currently have to request all permissions that they plan to use at install-time. This becomes a problem when a Snap wants to use many permissions as the installation experience suffers and the user has to either accept all permissions requested or deny the installation. This proposal provides an improvement to the experience by letting Snaps request permissions at run-time as long as those permissions are statically defined in the manifest at build-time.

Reviewer 2: That would be a new permission? Right now we just require that they request `endowment:ethereum-provider`, so it's like a dynamic permission on top of a static one.

> Snaps currently have to request all permissions that they plan to use at install-time. This becomes a problem when a Snap wants to use many permissions as the installation experience suffers and the user has to either accept all permissions requested or deny the installation. This proposal provides an improvement to the experience by letting Snaps request permissions at run-time as long as those permissions are statically defined in the manifest at build-time.

Author: `eth_accounts` is an edge-case because it is technically a permission that is granted when using certain RPC methods with `endowment:ethereum-provider`. It is not inherently granted just by having the endowment.

We could choose to enforce that you need to have it as part of `dynamicPermissions` to grant it via `endowment:ethereum-provider`. We could also choose to keep it as the edge-case that it is.

> Snaps currently have to request all permissions that they plan to use at install-time. This becomes a problem when a Snap wants to use many permissions as the installation experience suffers and the user has to either accept all permissions requested or deny the installation. This proposal provides an improvement to the experience by letting Snaps request permissions at run-time as long as those permissions are statically defined in the manifest at build-time.

Reviewer 2: I do wonder if we have created a strange design pattern with the current approach. What if a Snap just wants `eth_accounts` and is requesting `endowment:ethereum-provider` just for that, and not using anything else that the endowment offers? Maybe it should be a separate endowment that must be defined in `dynamicPermissions` and is never in `initialPermissions`. Assuming this change would be in manifest version 0.2 and would not be backwards compatible.

## Specification

> Formal specifications are written in Typescript. Usage of `CAIP-N` specifications, where `N` is a number, are references to [Chain Agnostic Improvement Proposals](https://github.com/ChainAgnostic/CAIPs).

### Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" written in uppercase in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt)

### Snap Manifest

This SIP adds a new field to the Snap manifest called `dynamicPermissions`.
This field can be used in tandem with the existing `initialPermissions`, but keep in mind that permissions in this field are not granted by installation: They MUST be requested when needed. The field follows the same format as `initialPermissions`.

The new field can be specified as follows in a `snap.manifest.json` file:

```json
{
  "initialPermissions": {
    "endowment:transaction-insight": {}
  },
  "dynamicPermissions": {
    "snap_dialog": {},
    "snap_getBip44Entropy": [
      {
        "coinType": 1
      },
      {

>         "coinType": 3

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that the Snap can never dynamically request a coinType that was not declared in the manifest? 

And what does this mean for caveats like `endowment:rpc`? Let's say dapp is `false` and snaps is `true.` Can the Snap dynamically request to make `dapp` true?

Author: As we have no way to merge caveats right now (and aren't planning to for v1 of this API) the limitations are:
- The snap can never request a caveat that is not predefined in the manifest
- The snap can also never request something that doesn't match exactly the definition in the manifest, you cannot even request coinType 1 and 3 separately.

Reviewer: This should be mentioned in the SIP!

Author: Is it not already?
